<!---

  Convert this file with:

  pandoc -V urlcolor=blue using.md -o using.pdf

--->

Using `SDL_bgi`
===============


Although `SDL_bgi` is almost perfectly compatible with the original BGI
library, a few minor differences were introduced to take advantage of
modern SDL graphics. You don't want a slow library!


Compiling programs
------------------

To compile a C or C++ program in GNU/Linux or macOS you may use the
`gcc` or `clang` compiler:

    $ gcc -o program program.c -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2

To compile a program in MSYS2 + mingw-w64:

    $ gcc -o program.exe program.c -lmingw32 -L/mingw64/bin \
        -lSDL_bgi -lSDL2main -lSDL2 # -mwindows

The `-mwindows` switch creates a window-only program, i.e. a terminal
is not started. **Beware:** functions provided by `stdio.h` will not
work if you don't start a terminal. Your program will have to rely on
mouse input only!

Code::Blocks users should read the file `howto_CodeBlocks.md`.

Dev-C++ users should read the file `howto_Dev-Cpp.md`.

Windows users **must** declare the `main()` function as:

    int main (int argc, char *argv[])

even if `argc` and `argv` are not used. Your program will not compile
if you use a different `main()` definition (i.e. `int main (void)`),
because of conflict with the `WinMain()` definition. Please consult
<https://wiki.libsdl.org/FAQWindows> for details.

Most old programs that use the original BGI library should compile
unmodified. For instance,

    int gd = DETECT, gm;
    initgraph (&gd, &gm, "");

opens an 800x600 window, mimicking SVGA graphics. Minimal `dos.h`
and `conio.h` are provided in the `test/` directory; they're good
enough to compile the original `bgidemo.c` (not provided: it's not
FOSS) unmodified.

Please note that non-BGI functions are *not* implemented. If you need
`conio.h` for GNU/Linux, please see the ncurses-based implementation
<https://github.com/nowres/conio-for-linux>.

To specify the window size, you can use the new SDL driver:

    gd = SDL;
    gm = <mode>;

where `<mode>` can be one of the following:

    CGA             320x200
    SDL_320x200     320x200
    EGA             640x350
    SDL_640x480     640x350
    VGA             640x480
    SDL_640x480     640x480
    SVGA            800x600
    SDL_800x600     800x600
    SDL_1024x768    1024x768
    SDL_1152x900    1152x900
    SDL_1280x1024   1280x1024
    SDL_1366x768    1366x768
    SDL_FULLSCREEN  fullscreen

You may want to use `initwindow(int width, int height)` instead.

`SDL_bgi.h` defines the `_SDL_BGI_H` constant. You can check for its
presence and write programs that employ `SDL_bgi` extensions; please
have a look at the test program `fern.c`.


Screen refresh
--------------

The only real difference between the original BGI and `SDL_bgi` is the
way the screen is refreshed. In BGI, every graphics element drawn on
screen was immediately displayed. This was a terribly inefficient way
of drawing stuff: the screen should be refreshed only when the drawing
is done. For example, in SDL2 this action is performed by
`SDL_RenderPresent()`.

You can choose whether to open the graphics system using
`initgraph()`, which toggles BGI compatibility on and forces a screen
refresh after every graphics command, or using `initwindow()` that
leaves you in charge of refreshing the screen when needed, using the
new function `refresh()`.

The first method is fully compatible with the original BGI, but it
also painfully slow. An experimental feature is 'auto mode': if the
environment variable `SDL_BGI_RATE` is set to `auto`, screen refresh
is automatically performed; this is **much** faster than the default.
This variable may also contain a refresh rate; e.g. 60. Unfortunately,
auto mode may not work on some NVIDIA graphic cards.

As a tradeoff between performance and speed, a screen refresh is also
performed by `getch()`, `kbhit()`, and `delay()`. Functions
`sdlbgifast(void)`, `sdlbgislow(void)`, and `sdlbgiauto(void)` are
also available. They trigger fast, slow, and auto mode, respectively.

Documentation and sample BGI programs are available at this address:
<http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~main/cs1300/doc/bgi/> Nearly all programs
can be compiled with `SDL_bgi`.

The original Borland Turbo C manual is also available at
<https://archive.org/details/bitsavers_borlandturReferenceGuide1988_19310204>.


Avoid slow programs
-------------------

This is possibly the slowest `SDL_bgi` code one could write:

````
while (! event ()) {
  putpixel (random(x), random(y), random(col));
  refresh ();
}
````

This code, which plots pixels until an event occurs (mouse click or
key press), is extremely inefficient. First of all, calling `event()`
is relatively expensive; secondly, refreshing the screen after
plotting a single pixel is insane. You should write something like
this:

````
counter = 0;
stop = 0;
while (! stop) {
  putpixel (random(x), random(y), random(col));
  if (1000 == ++counter) {
    if (event())
      stop = 1;
    refresh ();
    counter = 0;
  }
}
````

In general, you should use `kbhit()`, `mouseclick()` and `event()`
sparingly, because they're slow.


Differences
-----------

- The following functions may be called but do nothing:

````
_graphfreemem       - unneeded
_graphgetmem        - unneeded
installuserdriver   - it makes no sense in SDL
installuserfont     - should I implement it for SDL_ttf?
registerbgidriver   - it makes no sense in SDL
registerbgifont     - it makes no sense in SDL
setgraphbufsize     - unneeded
````

- `setpalette()` only affects future drawing. That is, you can't get a
``rotating palette animation'' as in Turbo C.

- an 8x8 bitmap font is included, and it's the only one font. Changes
to other BGI fonts (e.g. `TRIPLEX_FONT`, and others) have no effect:
consider using `SDL_ttf`!

- `putimage()` bitwise operations (`XOR_PUT`, `OR_PUT` etc.) are
applied to RGB colour components. This is apparently not the same
behaviour as old Turbo C.


Colours
-------

The default BGI palette includes 16 named colours (`BLACK`...`WHITE`);
standard BGI functions use this palette.

An extended ARGB palette of `PALETTE_SIZE` additional colours can
be created and accessed using functions described below. Please see
the example programs in the `test/` directory.


Additions
---------

Some functions and macros have been added to add functionality and
provide compatibility with other BGI implementations (namely, Xbgi and
WinBGIm).

Further, the following variables (declared in `SDL_bgi.h`) are
accessible to the programmer:

    SDL_Window   *bgi_window;
    SDL_Renderer *bgi_renderer;
    SDL_Texture  *bgi_texture;

and can be used by native SDL2 functions; see example in
`test/sdlbgidemo.c`.

- `void initwindow(int width, int height)` lets you open a window
specifying its size.

- `void detectgraph(int *gd, int *gm)` returns `SDL`,
`SDL_FULLSCREEN`.

- `void setrgbpalette(int color, int r, int g, int b)` sets an
additional palette containing RGB colours (up to `MAXRGBCOLORS` + 1).
See example in `test/mandelbrot.c`.

- `void setrgbcolor(int col)` and `void setbkrgbcolor(int col)` are
the RGB equivalent of `setcolor(int col)` and `setbkcolor(int col)`.
`col` is an allocated colour entry in the RGB palette.

- `COLOR(int r, int g, int b)` can be used as an argument whenever a
colour value is expected (e.g. `setcolor()` and other functions). It's
an alternative to `setrgbcolor(int col)` and `setbkrgbcolor(int col)`.
Allocating colours with `setrgbpalette()` and using `setrgbcolor()` is
much faster, though.

- `IS_BGI_COLOR(int c)` and `IS_RGB_COLOR(int c)` return 1 if the
current colour is standard BGI or RGB, respectively. The argument is
actually redundant.

- `ALPHA_VALUE(int c)`, `RED_VALUE(int c)`, `GREEN_VALUE(int c)`, and
`BLUE_VALUE(int c)` return the A, R, G, B component of an RGB colour
in the extended palette.

- `setalpha(int col, Uint8 alpha)` sets the alpha component of colour
'col'.

- `setblendmode(int blendmode)` sets the blending mode for screen
refresh (`SDL_BLENDMODE_NONE` or `SDL_BLENDMODE_BLEND`).

- `showerrorbox(const char *message)` opens a windows error message
box with the specified message.

- `void _putpixel(int x, int y)` is equivalent to `putpixel(int x, int
y, int col)`, but uses the current drawing colour and the pixel is not
refreshed in slow mode.

- `random(range)` is defined as macro: `rand()%range`

- `int getch()` waits for a key and returns its ASCII code. Special
keys and the `SDL_QUIT` event are also reported; please see
`SDL_bgi.h`.

- `void delay(msec)` waits for `msec` milliseconds.

- `int mouseclick(void)` returns the code of the mouse button that was
clicked, or 0 if none was clicked. Mouse buttons and movement
constants are defined in `SDL_bgi.h`:

````
WM_LBUTTONDOWN
WM_MBUTTONDOWN
WM_RBUTTONDOWN
WM_WHEEL
WM_WHEELUP
WM_WHEELDOWN
WM_MOUSEMOVE
````

- `int mousex(void)` and `int mousey(void)` return the mouse
coordinates of the last click.

- `int ismouseclick(int btn)` returns 1 if the `btn` mouse button was
clicked.

- `void getmouseclick(int kind, int *x, int *y)` sets the x, y
coordinates of the last button click expected by `ismouseclick()`.

- `int getevent(void)` waits for a keypress or mouse click, and
returns the code of the key or mouse button. It also catches and
returns `SDL_QUIT` events.

- `int event(void)` is a non-blocking version of `getevent()`.

- `int eventtype(void)` returns the type of the last event.

- `void readimagefile(char *filename, int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2)`
reads a `.bmp` file and displays it immediately (i.e. no refresh
needed).

- `void sdlbgifast(void)` triggers "fast mode" even if the graphics
system was opened with `initgraph()`. Calling `refresh()` is needed to
display graphics.

- `void sdlbgislow(void)` triggers "slow mode" even if the graphics
system was opened with `initwindow()`. Calling `refresh()` is not
needed.

- `void sdlbgiauto(void)` triggers automatic screen refresh. **Note**:
it may not work on some graphics cards.

- `void setwinoptions(char *title, int x, int y, Uint32 flags)` lets
you specify the window title (default is `SDL_bgi`), window position,
and some SDL2 window flags OR'ed together. In particular, you can get
non-native fullscreen resolution with:

````
setwinoptions ("", -1, -1, SDL_WINDOW_FULLSCREEN);
initwindow (800, 600);
````

- `void showerrorbox(char *msg)` opens an error message box with the
specified message.

- `void writeimagefile(char *filename, int left, int top, int right,
int bottom)` writes a `.bmp` file from the screen rectangle defined by
(left,top--right,bottom).

- `void xkbhit(void)` returns 1 when any key is pressed, including
Shift, Alt, etc.


Multiple Windows
----------------

Subsequent calls to `initgraph()` make it possible to open several
windows; only one of them is active (= being drawn on) at any given
time, regardless of mouse focus.

Functions `setvisualpage()` and `setactivepage()` only work properly
in single window mode.

- Optionally, use `setwinoptions(char *title, int x, int y, Uint32
flags)` as explained above;

- `int getcurrentwindow()` returns the current window identifier;

- `void setcurrentwindow(int id)` sets the current window. `id` is an
integer identifier, as returned by `getcurrentwindow()`;

- `void closewindow(int id)` closes a window of given id.


The real thing
--------------

You may want to try the online Borland Turbo C 2.01 emulator at the
Internet Archive:
<https://archive.org/details/msdos_borland_turbo_c_2.01>.

The `bgidemo.c` program demonstrates the capabilities of the BGI
library. You can download it and compile it using `SDL_bgi`; in
Windows, you will have to change its `main()` definition.


Bugs & Issues
-------------

Console routines such as `getch()` may hang or not work properly in
MSYS2. As far as I can tell, it's a bug in MSYS2 console handling.

Colours don't have the same RGB values as the original BGI colours.
But they look better (IMHO).

Probably, this documentation is not 100% accurate. Your feedback is
more than welcome.
