README
------

This is `SDL_bgi`, a graphics library written in C and based on SDL2.
`SDL_bgi` provides graphics primitives, and is much easier to use than
plain SDL2. It should be especially useful for beginners, i.e. in
introductory programming courses. I wrote `SDL_bgi` because I wanted a
simple to use but fast graphics library for my experiments with
fractals and cellular automata, using the BGI syntax I'm used to.

`SDL_bgi` is nearly fully compatible with BGI (`graphics.h`), the
Borland Graphics Interface that was the 'de facto' standard in PC
graphics back in DOS days. For instance, it compiles and runs the
original `bgidemo.c` almost perfectly. `SDL_bgi` also attempts to be
compatibile with another BGI clone, WinBGIm (see links below). One of
the aims of `SDL_bgi` is the preservation of old software written for
BGI. 

`SDL_bgi` is pretty fast and very easy to use, and it also provides
extensions for ARGB colours, mouse support, and multiple windows.
Native SDL2 functions can be used alongside `SDL_bgi` functions.
`SDL_bgi` can be used by C++ programs, too.

`SDL_bgi` should compile on any platform supported by SDL2; it has
been tested in GNU/Linux, MS Windows (MSYS2 + Mingw-w64, CodeBlocks,
Dev-C++), Mac OS X Yosemite, and Raspberry Pi. A few example programs
are provided in the `test/` directory.

If you don't need BGI compatibility, I suggest that you check out
`SDL_gfx`, a graphics library that is more complete and more powerful
than `SDL_bgi`.

Links:

0. The SDL library:
   <https://www.libsdl.org/>

1. WinBGIm, another BGI Windows port:
   <http://www.cs.colorado.edu/~main/cs1300/doc/bgi/>

2. SDL_gfx, graphics drawing primitives and more:
   <https://sourceforge.net/projects/sdl2gfx/>

3. BGI on Wikipedia:
   <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borland_Graphics_Interface>

4. Xbgi, a BGI XLib port:
   <http://libxbgi.sourceforge.net/>

5. Borland Turbo C 2.01 online emulator:
   <https://archive.org/details/msdos_borland_turbo_c_2.01>

This library is licensed under the Zlib license; please see the
enclosed file LICENSE. The 8x8 font comes from A. Schiffler's SDL_gfx.

Brought to you by Guido Gonzato, PhD <guido.gonzato at gmail.com>
